Foothills Church.
Happy New Year.
Oh my goodness.
Way to start off your new year coming to church.
Yes, I love it.
This week is the most determined week in human history.
Because right now all over the world people are at the peak of their optimism, they're at the peak of their discipline, and they're the peak of their self-confidence.
Right now they are making New Year's resolutions
Most of them more than one, because apparently one life area of life falling apart isn't enough.
We want to fix everything at once.
But studies show that the average resolution only lasts about four months.
One survey found that fewer than 10% of people who make New Year's resolutions actually finish the year strong in their resolution.
Which means that the most successful resolution most people will keep in 2025 is
I will stop making resolutions.
Amen?
So if you're feeling extremely confident and committed to your goals right now, yay for you.
Yay for you.
You're experiencing the most determined week of the year.
Enjoy it while it lasts.
Now, I think we all realize that human beings,
need more than once a year new beginnings.
We were made for daily renewal.
We're in need of a kind of transformation in our lives that doesn't depend on a date on the calendar, but on the God who can make all things new.
And that's exactly what the heartbeat of this series we're stepping into in this new year in the book of Isaiah.
It's exactly what it's all about.
speaks to a people who desperately longed for restoration, they desperately longed for hope, they desperately longed for a fresh start.
Not because the year changed, but because their world was broken.
Their strength was failing and they needed a redeemer who could do what resolutions never could.
Not just inspire change, but sustain it.
not just demand commitment, but actually empower it.
Not just call us forward, but carry us forward.
And so today, on the first Sunday of this new year, we don't just open a new calendar, we open the ancient promise from an everlasting God, a God who says in Isaiah, I'm doing a new thing.
I'm doing a new thing.
Though your sins be like scarlet,
they will be white as snow.
Those who wait on the Lord shall renew their strength."
That's the message of Isaiah.
So yes, the world is making resolutions, but the church has something far better.
We have a God of renewal.
We have a Christ who completes what he starts in a spirit who strengthens what we commit and empowers it.
So if you're ready, let's step into the new year, not with self-powered promises, but with a God-sustained hope.
Let's step into this new year with a new series in the book of Isaiah, the prophet Isaiah.
If you have your Bibles with you and encourage you to follow along this morning, your outline says that I'm gonna be preaching on the first four chapters.
So I hope you didn't make any plans for later, but...
There's a lot of repetition.
It's just a heads up for you.
There's a lot of repetition in this, but there's, there's some key themes and I've streamlined it for you and we're going to zero on those key things, but I need you to follow with me and track with me and look at some texts.
I'm not going to have them all on the screen for you.
And so, turn in your Bibles Isaiah chapter one.
We're going to get there in a moment.
I want to start out though by getting familiar with who this prophet is and the circumstances in which he's ministering to
the leadership of Israel and also the people.
Just keep in mind that prophets spoke both to the people, but primarily to the leadership, trying to give wisdom and direction to them in their leadership.
First of all, I wanna remind you that prophets served two primary functions, foretelling and foretelling.
Now many of you are familiar with this, but this is just a refresher.
So at times, they told the people what was coming.
Off the time, we think probably, all they do is tell the future.
But at times, they told people what was coming.
But the vast majority of the ministry was reminding people what God had already said, calling them back into alignment with Him.
Isaiah ministered during the same time as other prophets you may be familiar with, the prophet Amos, Hosea, Micah,
These were contemporaries of Isaiah.
He began his ministry.
Now, if you, or like me in history class, every time there were dates that came up, you just glazed over.
You know, so, because I always thought, they're going to remember it anyway.
When was the Battle of Baldra?
I don't know.
Daily, I mean, I don't know.
I need you to remember, I need you to be better than me, I need you to remember this date.
All right, you ready?
Open up your brain cells, right?
740 BC, 740 BC, say it with me.
740 BC, this is when Isaiah begins his ministry and it lasts 60 years and covers the rule of four different kings.
All right, so he's working with four different leadership administrations, all right?
This is the reason he came to refer to as the prince of the prophets.
Now let's get our bearings as to the circumstances in history when Isaiah served.
This is all relevant and it will all help you put our teaching into context as we move through this series.
So to this point in Israel's history, they have had three kings and a unified nation.
They started out with King Saul and then they had King Hu.
David, and then the third one was King Solomon.
Excellent.
And under King Solomon, Israel became a rich and powerful kingdom.
But in order to sustain that, the people were heavily taxed and forced labor, all right?
So when Solomon's son, Rehoboam, came to the throne,
The people and the leadership around him begged him to lighten their load.
They begged him to lighten their load.
But he arrogantly refuses.
It's a classic case of how pride poisons everything it infects.
Because of his private choice, the people come to ruin, the leadership comes to ruin, ultimately the nation.
Pride infects it all.
You can read all about it in 1 Kings 12.
They beg Rehoboam, lighten up, you don't need it, and he just heavy hand.
Now, the nation, and that unified nation under Solomon and now Rehoboam, the nation was made up of 12 tribes.
You've probably heard this before, 12 tribes, that's born out of the 12 sons of Jacob, and Jacob who was later renamed Israel.
So that's how Israel got its name.
Because of King Rehoboam's prideful leadership,
the 10 northern tribes seceded from the union.
We've had it with this freak.
And so we're going to secede from the union.
We're going to start our own nation, right?
State of Jefferson, right?
So they're going to secede.
And so they set up their own capital.
They set up their own
headquarters for their worship, kind of their own, like holy city.
And they just duplicate what had been in the United Kingdom.
So I have a map that I want to show you, and then I want to go through some exercises here.
So you see the two kingdoms.
You've got Judah down in the south, right?
Judah's down in the south, Israel's to the north, right?
So say that with me, north and south.
Right?
Great job.
North-South, right?
And then what?
Israel, Judah.
All right?
Now, here's one other thing I want you to remember.
I want you to remember a number.
Now, there were a number of kings that served in both of these kingdoms.
But there were zero godly kings in the north.
Can you say zero with me?
All right, now it's a new year, a new you.
We're going.
So, north,
South, Israel, Judah, zero, eight.
There were eight godly kings who ruled in the South.
That's not the total number of kings.
I'm not saying that.
I'm saying that there were only eight who were godly.
But it's better in the North.
They were zero.
You can see on this map, or maybe you can't, it's fine print.
But down in Judah, Jerusalem remains the head of the spiritual center.
But way up the top, right up the top of that yellow, there's a little town called Dan, a little area called Dan.
That's where they set up their spiritual sort of center of Israel to the north, all right?
So now the big green mass up to the right, that says Aram, but by the time that
Isaiah begins to minister to the southern king of Ojuda, that has become the powerful superpower of Assyria.
Now, so now with this map in view, for the first time the Jewish peoples were divided separate nations.
Now here's something fascinating, but what happens?
the southern kingdom of Judas, where Isaiah primarily lived in the minister of the prophet, and he began his ministry in a date that you have memorized.
740, all right?
He began his ministry there, and now here's why I want you to remember that date, because we're gonna be coming into text in Isaiah, and it's gonna dawn on you that Isaiah writes this 700 years before Christ.
And you'll go,
He's describing Jesus.
And he'll be like, yes, 700 years before Christ came.
So by the time that Isaiah began his ministry, both kingdoms were experiencing national security problems.
Assyria, their neighbor to the north, it was a rising superpower.
And these guys were bullies with a capital B. Israel was facing an existential threat of extinction.
because of Assyria.
Slowly, but gradually, Assyria would come down from the North and they start encroaching and annexing parts of Israel to the North.
And later, Judah in the South as well.
Despite the prophets like Isaiah and his contemporaries advising the leadership to turn to God and rely on his power and his protection, Israel and Judah instead entered into alliances with Assyria.
trying to have them protect them from all of the encroaching neighbors around them, protect them from Assyria, but also all the nations around them.
And so they entered into these kinds of peace deals and these kinds of agreements.
And this was the beginning of the end.
The northern kingdom of Israel was dismantled and carried off by the Assyrians
in 722 BC, so about 20 years after Isaiah had started his ministry in the south in Judah.
The southern kingdom of Judah, though, held off.
They didn't fall to a Syrian attack because one of those, how many good kings in the south?
Eight.
One of those eight kings was named Hezekiah, right?
And Hezekiah
Instead of relying on peace deals and alliances, Hezekiah turned to God and the city was saved.
It's a fascinating, fascinating story.
You can read all about it in the history books of Israel.
Second Kings 18 and 19, second Chronicles 32.
You can read all about the fascinating story.
And when you're in Israel, you get to go see Hezekiah's wall.
All right.
The troubles, the remaining kingdom of Judah there in the South,
The troubles they had outside their borders equally matched the troubles inside their borders.
The state of the union was in serious moral and ethical decay.
Ethical decay.
The first couple of chapters of Isaiah give us some insight into the condition of the nation, the condition of the church, the condition of the culture.
If you have your Bibles, look at Isaiah chapter one, verse two, hear me, you heavens, listen earth,
For the Lord has spoken, all right?
God's speaking through Isaiah now.
I reared children and brought them up, but they have rebelled against me.
The ox knows its master, the donkey, its owner's manger, but Israel does not know my people do not understand.
Woe to the sinful nation, a people whose guilt is great, a brood of evil doers, children given to corruption,
They have forsaken the Lord.
They have spurned the Holy One of Israel.
They've turned their backs on Him.
Why should you be beaten anymore?
Why do you persist in rebellion?
Your whole head is injured.
Your whole heart afflicted from the soul of your foot to the top of your head.
There's no soundness, only wounds and welts and open sores, not cleansed or banished or sued with a olive oil.
He's like, you guys are banging your heads against the wall.
When are you going to learn?
Verse seven, your country is desolate.
Your city's burned with fire.
Your fields are being stripped by foreigners right before you.
Daughter Zion is left like a shelter in a vineyard.
Verse eight says, like a hut in a cucumber field, like a city under siege.
Unless the Lord Almighty had left us some survivors, we would have become like Sodom.
We would have been like Gomorrah.
We know how that turned out.
The nation of Judah and its capital Jerusalem are likened in this text to unappreciative kids who have turned their backs on the only ones who could love them and provide for them.
And if you've ever had that happen to you, you know how heartbreaking that is.
None of the king's Isaiah minister to though, were totally inept.
They managed fairly sound economy, devised clever policies, yet the land was devastated.
The internal framework fragile and their foreign policy ineffective.
Things were falling apart as happens in the lives of those who refused to turn to God.
But Isaiah tries to give them wisdom.
Isaiah says, the real key to a nation that is doing well is being righteous before God.
The key to national well-being, the key to personal life well-being is righteousness before God.
Proverbs 14, 34 says, Godliness exalts a nation.
But sin is a disgrace to any people.
And disgrace is exactly what Judah was experiencing.
The spiritual condition of the church undoubtedly contributed to the national trouble.
The state of the church is discussed in chapter one verse 10.
Here the word of the Lord, you rulers of Sodom, listen to the instruction of our God, you people of Gomorrah.
The multitude of your sacrifices, what are they to me?
I have more than enough burnt offerings of rams and the fat of fat and animal.
I have no pleasure in the blood of bulls and lambs and goats.
When you come to appear before me, who is asking this of you, this trampling of my courts?
Stop bringing meaningless offerings.
Your incense is detestable between me, new moons, Sabbaths, and convocations.
I can't bear your worthless assemblies.
Your new moon feasts and your appointed festivals, I hate with all my being.
Man, these are strong words.
When you spread out your hands in prayer, God says, I hide my eyes from you.
They had abandoned the God of Jacob, the God of Abraham, of Isaac of Jacob.
They embraced all sorts of other foreign gods.
They polluted their worship, they diluted their devotion.
They got sidetracked and distracted.
They kept the outward practices of their devotion going, but there's no substance to it on the inside.
That's an easy trap to fall into.
They kept going to church, participating in church events,
even bringing offerings on Sunday, but in their relationships, in their families, in their neighborhoods, in their businesses, there was no evidence of godly behavior, no evidence of godly character.
So what we begin to realize right away in this prophecy, religious looking behavior disconnected from any real heart surrender, that's an offense to God.
It's an irritant to him.
He's pretty irritated by it, right?
These people were praying for their neighbors on Sunday and then praying on them all the rest of the week.
It's a classic description of hypocrisy.
In fact, the entire culture prayed on each other.
Look at verse 21 to 23.
See how the faithful city has become a prostitute.
She once was full of justice, righteousness used to dwell in her, but now murders.
Your silver has become dross.
Your choice wine is diluted with water.
Your rulers are rebels partnered with thieves.
They all love bribes and chase after gifts.
They do not defend the cause of the fatherless.
The widow's case does not come before them, praying on each other.
This section is actually a poem of lament over the state of the society in Judah.
Friends, it was a wicked and depraved society that had wandered far from God.
Now, I know that all that sounds dreadfully depressing.
And you're like, she's faster.
Couldn't we have started on a happy new year?
But here's the reality.
Here's reality.
Unless we're willing to be completely honest about the brokenness of our lives, unless we're willing to honestly own our own faults and admit our failures, we will never recognize our need for renewal and restoration.
We have to start with the hard.
We have to start with the negative.
We have to start with how we have to own where we are in our brokenness.
Isaiah brings an honest message.
He loves them enough to bring an honest message to the people.
A message with two very critical aspects to it.
There's penalty for this kind of behavior, but there's also promise.
There's also a way out.
The penalty and promise in Isaiah's message first
The honest message Isaiah brings clearly communicates penalty for rebellion and injustice.
Practice in the people's lives.
Notice, he's gonna be talking about things that have been come lifestyle.
This isn't just, I made a mistake or had a bad season or a backslip for a bit.
This is a lifestyle that they're practicing this rebellion from God.
The choice to ignore God
brings two things on a person Isaiah tells us.
First, it brings pain and suffering.
When we wander and rebel from God and we wander from Him, it brings pain and suffering.
Sometimes it's mental, emotional anguish, sometimes it's physical.
This text teaches us there are natural consequences when the moral and ethical laws God built into the universe are violated.
The reason for this is because God has designed his creation to function in accordance with his holy and righteous laws.
So when you and I cut across the grain of those laws, we live in ways we're not designed to live and pain and suffering results.
Does that make sense?
Now, please understand not all pain and suffering you and I experience is brought on by our own choices to ignore God.
Some of the pain and suffering we experience is a result of the sin-filled world we live in, right?
Sometimes it's the sinful choices of others that bring heartache into our lives, that bring pain into our lives.
Book of Romans tells us the whole creation groans looking forward to its redemption.
Some of the pain and suffering we experience is the result of sin of others.
And some is the result of the sin cursed creation we live in.
So to carry the attitude that all trouble or all struggle that we see in the lives of others is somehow the result of their rebellion from God.
That's not biblical, it's inaccurate and it's incredibly damaging to people.
But pain from others, that's not the pain and suffering that Isaiah is talking about.
The pain and suffering that Isaiah is talking about is the pain and suffering that's brought onto our lives when a person stubbornly refuses to stop their rebellion from God.
They stubbornly refuse to turn to him.
It brings struggle.
It brings heartache into their lives.
At some point, God gives the rebellious person what they want.
They reject God's presence and they reject his involvement in their lives.
And so they allow their evil to play the role of judge and disciplinarian in their lives.
In other words, their behavior brings it on themselves.
Notice chapter one verse 31.
The mighty man will become tender and his work a spark both will burn together with no one to quench the fire.
They brought it on themselves.
And if you flip over to chapter three, your second, to hear pages turning and devices changing.
Chapter three, verses eight to nine, Jerusalem staggers.
Judas falling.
Their words and deeds are against the Lord, defying his glorious presence.
Notice, the look on their faces testifies against them.
They parade their sin like Sodom.
They don't hide it, woe to them.
In other words, they've seen the wall there, but they keep banging their head against it.
They see the fire and they keep putting their hand in it.
So they're bringing heartache and wounding and burning into their lives.
As you and I can't ignore the fundamental wisdom and principles of life that God has designed into the world, we can't just ignore them and not get burned.
You and I can't ignore God's Word in ways, in matters of life.
We can't ignore His Word in matters of money.
We can't ignore His Word as principles and matters of relationships, health.
We can't ignore God's design in these matters and expect to not pay any consequences for that.
There's natural consequences for that.
God says in your rebellion, you will bring about your own destruction.
The second thing a sustained pattern of rebellion brings is direct judgment of God.
That's like the second phase.
If the natural consequences don't wake us up,
then the judgment of God comes.
Look at chapter two verses six through nine.
You Lord have abandoned your people, the descendants of Jacob.
They are full of superstitions from the east.
They practice divination like the Philistines and embrace pagan customs.
Their land is full of silver and gold.
There's no end of their treasures.
Their land is full of horses.
There's no end of their chariots.
The land is full of idols.
They bow down to the work of their hands to what their fingers have made.
Notice for a sign.
So the people will be brought low and everyone humbled.
If the pain and suffering that's experienced is a natural consequence of violating God's laws, that doesn't serve to wake us up.
Then the direct judgment of God is experienced.
God is a loving God.
Don't get me wrong.
We can't even describe how loving he is.
God is a loving God, but he's a holy God as well.
And because he's a holy, it is impossible for him to just overlook sin.
Oh, it's okay.
He mean well.
The very essence of his holiness requires that sin be punished.
Now, here's something important to remember about the judgment of God.
It is always delivered with one hope in mind, one hope in mind to serve, to discipline, train and draw people back to himself.
It's always rooted in love.
Notice the verses that follow the announcement of coming judgment in chapter one.
Look at verse 24.
Therefore the Lord, the Almighty,
The mighty one of Israel declares, I will vent my wrath on my foes and avenge myself on my enemies.
I will turn my hand against you.
I will thoroughly purge away your dross and remove all your impurities.
See, this is the purpose of the judgment.
This is the purpose of the discipline.
I will restore your leaders as in the days of old, your rulers as at the beginning.
After you will be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.
You see, the picture is one of heating up the metals and burning out the impurities so that there's purity there.
And here's the fascinating thing about Isaiah's message, both for his original hearers and for us, as clear and decisive as this penalty for rebellion that's announced, as clear as that's announced, the promise of redemption is clearly stated too.
He gives them a pathway to renewal.
He gives them a pathway to restoration.
Look at chapter one verse 18.
I love this.
Come now, let's settle the matter.
God says, let's get together.
Let's just settle this, can we?
Though your sins are like scarlet, they shall be white as snow.
Right?
You see, this is why we have to drag ourselves through the yuck and the muck of the negative part of this prophecy in order for the promise to be like, yes, thank God, right?
Because we all know how broken we are, but here the hope comes.
Though they are read as crimson, they shall be like wool.
If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the good things
of the land, but if you resist and rebel, you will be devoured by the sword for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it."
Look at verses 27 to 28, Zion will be delivered with justice.
Her penitent ones with righteousness, but rebels and sinners will both be broken and those who forsake the Lord will perish.
If that's your practice,
There's only doom in store.
Friends, Isaiah doesn't mince any words to his audience, so it's important we don't mince any words in this moment.
God says, turn to me.
Turn to me, come to me.
Come to me.
No matter how deep the stain of sin, I will remove it.
Do you hear that?
You said God's promise.
No matter how long you've walked without me, never too late.
Come, do you hear that?
That's the heart of love.
No matter how impure your life has been, I can cleanse you and make you as pure as freshly fallen snow.
God says, I can take the dirtiest, filthiest, blackest heart and make it white as wool.
Man.
Isn't that a beautiful promise in a new year?
I'm like, goodness.
God says, if you'll just come to me, if we'll dial, if we just come and open your heart to me, let's settle this matter.
Follow me.
I will be your provider, your protector, your healer.
All you have to do is admit you've lived by your own rules and it hasn't worked out so well.
That's all you have to do.
And now realize you need to and want to align with me.
And when you live by your own rules, God says it's holding on to lead to heartache.
But you come to Him.
When you return to God, it leads to freedom, healing, joy, hope, rest, peace, all those things.
We crave.
In this new year, we all need a redeemer who can do what resolutions never can.
In this new year, we long for a redeemer, not more resolutions.
I invite Mark to come back up and help us with the end of this, just to give us some response time.
God's message to us through Isaiah's clear friends.
Rebellion from God brings heartache.
That's just what happens.
When we don't align our lives with God, it brings heartache.
But when we align our lives,
He promises to deliver.
If we'll turn to Him, He promises to deliver.
Have you turned to God in your life?
Have you done that?
If you've never turned to God and opened your heart to Him, boy, the New Year is a great time to do that.
No one's sin is too big.
No one's rebellion has gone on too long.
No one's secret is too dark.
It's just good news, friends.
No one's shame is too mortifying.
No one's wandered away and come back too many times.
Done with you.
It's not that way.
God sees all of that.
God sees all of it and he promises to forgive and to cleanse and to restore any and every heart who will come to him.
Will you come to him today?
Some of you, some of you in journeying with him for a long time and you're just filled with gratitude today for his faithfulness and you're experiencing that goodness and that blessing he promises.
But there might be some of you in the room today who you realize this new year,
In this new year, as you reflect on the last year, you realize there's areas of your life that aren't disrepair.
There's areas of your connection with God that you've shelved.
And so today is a perfect time for you to realign.
God says, come, let's settle a matter.
Get your heart right today, right?
Let's pray.
Lord,
I know there are many in the room today who they hear your words through the prophet Isaiah and it's just affirming to them.
They remember the dark days in their lives.
They remember maybe days of rebellion and they remember what a radical change happened in their lives when they turned their hearts to you.
And they're just saying thanks.
They're just telling you how much they love you.
and thankful for those.
And also thankful for those in the room today who are here.
And they've journeyed with you, but there's an area too out of their lives.
In fact, they may have focused a resolution, their New Year's resolution on that area of their lives, that they want to bring back an alignment with you.
God empower that in them.
Fill them with your spirit.
Don't let them
Don't forget about that awareness of that spot that's out of alignment.
Help them empower them to bring that back in alignment.
And Lord, I pray for those in the room today who maybe for the first time are coming to you.
They hear that call through the Prophet Isaiah, come let's settle this matter.
No matter how rough it's been,
You will bring renewal and restoration.
You will bring forgiveness and healing.
Thank you, Lord.